Azamat Tazhayakov, left in sketch, was found guilty of obstruction of justice and conspiring to obstruct justice by helping his friend, Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev.
A pal of the Boston Marathon bomber was convicted Monday of helping another college friend get rid of the terror suspect’s fireworks-filled backpack three days after the attack.
Azamat Tazhayakov, 20, covered his face while his mother broke into tears when the guilty verdict for obstruction of justice and conspiracy was announced in federal court.
A jury found that he helped Dias Kadyrbayev dispose of a backpack belonging to Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, which was left behind in the Russian-born bomber’s dorm room.
A jury found that Azamat Tazhayakov, left, helped Dias Kadyrbayev, right, dispose of a backpack belonging to alleged Boston Marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev.
The pack contained fireworks emptied of their explosive powder — which could have been used to make bombs — and was later found in a landfill.
Prosecutors said Kadyrbayev — who will stand trial in September — was the one who threw out the incriminating items, but that Tazhayakov was in on the plan.
Brothers Tamerlan (left) and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, are accused of carrying out the Boston Marathon bombings on April 15, 2013. Tamerlan died after a gunfight with police several days later and Dzhokhar was captured soon after.
“They took materials from that room that they never should have touched, and that’s what he is going to pay the price for,” juror Daniel Antonino, 49, said after the verdict.
Tazhayakov is facing a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison for obstruction and five years for conspiracy when he’s sentenced in October.
One of two pressure-cooker bombs goes off as Boston Marathon runners make their way to the finish line of the race, a Patriots’ Day institution. (Dan Lampariello/Reuters)
Matthew Myers, a lawyer for the Kazakh immigrant who studied engineering at the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth, called the verdict “somewhat surprising.”
He added the Boston jury must have felt a “certain pressure” to convict, given the tragedy that befell the city.
Three people died and over 260 others were injured when two bombs went off near the marathon’s finish line in April 2013.