Three additional men have been arrested and charged in connection with the Boston Marathon bombing investigation. Updates on Investigation Into Multiple Explosions in Boston October 21, 2013, 11:45 a.m. EDT Joint Release from Massachusetts Law Enforcement Agencies There has been recent reporting relating to whether or not the FBI, Boston Police, Massachusetts State Police, or other members of the Joint Terrorism Task Force knew the identities of the bombers before the shootout with the alleged marathon bombing suspects and were conducting physical surveillance of them on April 18, 2013. These claims have been repeatedly refuted by the FBI, Boston Police, and Massachusetts State Police. The law enforcement agencies have released a statement in response to the media inquiries and recent news reports. Press release August 29, 2013, 1:50 p.m. EDT Cambridge Man Indicted for Making False Statements in the Boston Marathon Bombing Terrorism Investigation Robel Phillipos, 19, was indicted on two counts of making false statements in connection with the Boston Marathon bombing investigation. The indictment alleges that during interviews with Joint Terrorism Task Force law enforcement officials, Phillipos concealed the fact that he and others had gone into suspect Dzhokhar Tsaraev’s dormitory room to remove several items, including a laptop and a backpack. Phillipos was originally charged on May 1, 2013 via criminal complaint. Press release August 8, 2013, 1:40 p.m. EDT Federal Grand Jury Indicts Two Men for Obstruction of Justice in the Boston Marathon Bombing Investigation Dias Kadyrbayev, 19, and Azamat Tazhayakov, 19, nationals of Kazakhstan who were residing in New Bedford on student visas, were charged today with conspiracy to obstruct justice and obstructing justice with the intent to impede the Boston Marathon bombing investigation. Kadyrbayev and Tazhayakov were originally charged on May 1, 2013 via criminal complaint. Press release June 27, 2013, 2:55 p.m. EDT Federal Grand Jury Returns 30-Count Indictment Related to Boston Marathon Explosions and Murder of MIT Police Officer Sean Collier The indictment charges Dzhokhar A. Tsarnaev, 19, a U.S. citizen and resident of Cambridge, Massachusetts, for his alleged role in using weapons of mass destruction at the Boston Marathon to kill three individuals and seriously injure many others, as well as for using a firearm to intentionally kill Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Police Officer Sean Collier. Tsarnaev was specifically charged with the use of a weapon of mass destruction resulting in death and conspiracy; bombing of a place of public use resulting in death and conspiracy; malicious destruction of property resulting in death and conspiracy; use of a firearm during and in relation to a crime of violence; use of a firearm during and in relation to a crime of violence causing death; carjacking resulting in serious bodily injury; interference with commerce by threats of violence; and aiding and abetting. Seventeen of the charges authorize a penalty of up to life in prison or the death penalty. Tsarnaev is scheduled to be arraigned on July 10, 2013. Press release | Indictment May 29, 2013, 6:00 p.m. EDT Statement Regarding Shooting Incident in Orlando, Florida The FBI is conducting a review of the May 22, 2013 shooting of Ibragim Todashev, 27, which occurred at Todashev’s residence, at 6022 Peregrine Avenue, Orlando, Florida. The FBI’s shooting incident review team interviews witnesses and gathers information regarding the shooting incident for presentation to a Shooting Incident Review Group (SIRG), which consists of members from the FBI and the Department of Justice. The SIRG examines all of the information and determines the reasonableness of the application of deadly force in accordance with the Department of Justice’s deadly force policy and the law. While this internal review process is occurring, we cannot comment regarding investigative details. The FBI takes very seriously any shooting incidents involving our agents, and as such, we have an effective, time-tested process for addressing them internally. The review process is thorough and objective and conducted as expeditiously as possible under the circumstances. Press release May 22, 2013, 10:45 a.m. EDT FBI Boston Division’s Response to Shooting Incident in Orlando, Florida The FBI is currently reviewing a shooting incident involving an FBI special agent. Based on preliminary information, the incident occurred in Orlando, Florida during the early morning hours of May 22, 2013. The agent, two Massachusetts State Police troopers, and other law enforcement personnel were interviewing an individual in connection with the Boston Marathon bombing investigation when a violent confrontation was initiated by the individual. During the confrontation, the individual was killed and the agent sustained non-life threatening injuries. As this incident is under review, we have no further details at this time. Press release May 10, 2013, 9:15 p.m. EDT Joint Statement from Special Agent in Charge Richard DesLauriers and Boston Police Commissioner Edward F. Davis In light of recent media reports, the FBI and BPD want to ensure the public and our community members that our agencies have long had—and continue to have—a close, strong and effective partnership. More May 9, 2013, 3:45 p.m. EDT Statement by Special Agent in Charge Richard DesLauriers Regarding Information Sharing Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTFs) members, including the state and local members, are responsible for maintaining awareness of possible threats to their respective jurisdictions. To manage and provide accessibility to the significant number of assessments conducted by the JTTF, each task force member has access to Guardian, a web-based counterterrorism incident management application that was launched in July 2004. In Guardian, threat and suspicious activity incidents are entered, assigned, and managed in a paperless environment and allows terrorist threats and suspicious activities to be viewed instantaneously by all system users. The primary purpose of Guardian is to make immediately available threat and suspicious activity information to all system users and to provide all users with the capability to search all incidents for threat trend analysis. More May 1, 2013, 1:15 p.m. EDT Three Men Arrested in Connection with Marathon Bombing Investigation Three men were arrested and charged today in connection with the Boston Marathon bombing investigation. Dias Kadyrbayev, 19, and Azamat Tazhayakov, 19, both of New Bedford, were charged in a criminal complaint with conspiracy to obstruct justice by conspiring to destroy, conceal, and cover up tangible objects belonging to suspected marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, namely a laptop computer and backpack containing fireworks. A third man, Robel Phillipos, 19, of Cambridge, was charged with willfully making materially false statements to federal law enforcement officials during a terrorism investigation. More | Kadyrbayev and Tazhayakov complaint (pdf) | Phillipos complaint (pdf) April 24, 2013, 11:45 a.m. EDT Update on Condition of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev According to Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev remains in fair condition. The FBI is releasing this information at the request of the hospital. Press release April 23, 2013, 12:50 p.m. EDT Update on Condition of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev According to Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev is in fair condition. The FBI is releasing this information at the request of the hospital. Press release April 22, 2013, 5:00 p.m. EDT Crime Scene Handed Back to City of Boston April 22, 2013, 1:35 p.m. EDT Suspect in Boston Marathon Attack Charged with Using a Weapon of Mass Destruction Dzhokhar A. Tsarnaev, 19, a U.S. citizen and resident of Cambridge, Massachusetts, has been charged with using a weapon of mass destruction against persons and property at the Boston Marathon on April 15, 2013, resulting in the death of three people and injuries to more than 200 people. In a criminal complaint unsealed today in U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts, Tsarnaev is specifically charged with one count of using and conspiring to use a weapon of mass destruction (namely, an improvised explosive device, or IED) against persons and property within the United States resulting in death, and one count of malicious destruction of property by means of an explosive device resulting in death. The statutory charges authorize a penalty, upon conviction, of death or imprisonment for life or any term of years. Tsarnaev had his initial court appearance today from his hospital room. Full press release | Criminal complaint (pdf) April 22, 2013, 9:00 a.m. EDT Update on Condition of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev According to Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev remains in serious condition. The FBI is releasing this information at the request of the hospital. Press release April 21, 2013, 9:55 a.m. EDT Update on Condition of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev According to Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev remains in serious condition. The FBI is releasing this information at the request of the hospital. Press release April 19, 2013, 10:10 p.m. EDT Message from FBI Director Mueller on the Arrest of the Boston Bombing Suspect During this long week, we have seen an extraordinary effort by law enforcement, intelligence, and public safety agencies. These collaborative efforts, with the help and cooperation of the public, resulted in the successful outcome we have seen tonight. The investigation will continue as part of our efforts to seek answers and justice, and there will be no pause in that effort. But tonight, I wish to thank all those who worked so tirelessly throughout the week in the pursuit of safety and justice. Press release April 19, 2013, 9:53 p.m. EDT Remarks of Special Agent in Charge Richard DesLauriers at Press Conference on Capture of Bombing Suspect It seems like many months since Monday, April 15, the day of the Boston Marathon bombings. Yet, it has merely been five days since the tragic explosions that took three lives, critically injured over 180 spectators, and instilled terror and fear among the citizens of the city of Boston, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and elsewhere. Today, the city of Boston, the city of Cambridge, and the city of Watertown—and many other communities—can breathe a sigh of relief knowing that two perpetrators who caused so much pain and anguish are no longer a threat to our personal safety and our communities. More April 19, 2013, 9:15 p.m. EDT 2011 Request for Information on Tamerlan Tsarnaev from Foreign Government In early 2011, a foreign government asked the FBI for information about Tamerlan Tsarnaev. The request stated that it was based on information that he was a follower of radical Islam and a strong believer, and that he had changed drastically since 2010 as he prepared to leave the United States for travel to the country’s region to join unspecified underground groups. In response to this 2011 request, the FBI checked U.S. government databases and other information to look for such things as derogatory telephone communications, possible use of online sites associated with the promotion of radical activity, associations with other persons of interest, travel history and plans, and education history. The FBI also interviewed Tamerlan Tsarnaev and family members. The FBI did not find any terrorism activity, domestic or foreign, and those results were provided to the foreign government in the summer of 2011. The FBI requested but did not receive more specific or additional information from the foreign government. More April 19, 2013, 9:00 p.m. EDT Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, suspect in bombing investigation, is now in custody. April 19, 2013, 8:20 a.m. EDT Updated Photo of Suspect 2 Released We are aware of the law enforcement activity in the greater Boston area. The situation is ongoing. We are working with local authorities to determine what happened. Press release April 19, 2013, 2:00 a.m. EDT Additional Photos Released in Bombings Case Suspect 2 Behind Lady 1 April 18, 2013, 5:00 p.m. EDT Video and Photos Released in Bombings Case April 18, 2013, 5:00 p.m. EDT Remarks of Special Agent in Charge Richard DesLauriers at Press Conference on Bombing Investigation Our collective law enforcement team has pursued thousands leads and tips. As I said two days ago, we are working methodically and with a sense of urgency to identify those responsible for the bombings. Within the last day or so, through that careful process, we initially developed a single person of interest. Not knowing if the individual was acting alone or in concert with others, we obviously worked with extreme purpose to make that determination... More importantly, it was done to ensure the future safety of the city, the commonwealth and the country. Indeed, through that process, the FBI developed a second suspect. Today, we are enlisting the public’s help to identify the two suspects. After a very detailed analysis of photo, video, and other evidence, we are releasing photos of the two suspects. They are identified as Suspect 1 and Suspect 2. They appear to be associated. More Special Agent in Charge of the FBI’s Boston Field Office Richard DesLauriers, United States Attorney Carmen Ortiz, and FBI JTTF law enforcement partners will hold a press briefing today, April 18, regarding the Boston Marathon investigation, at 5:00 p.m. at The Sheraton Hotel, 39 Dalton Street, Third Floor, Commonwealth Ballroom, Boston. Valid media credentials are required for admittance. Press release April 17, 2013, 2:50 p.m. EDT No Arrest Made in Bombing Investigation Contrary to widespread reporting, no arrest has been made in connection with the Boston Marathon attack. Over the past day and a half, there have been a number of press reports based on information from unofficial sources that has been inaccurate. Since these stories often have unintended consequences, we ask the media, particularly at this early stage of the investigation, to exercise caution and attempt to verify information through appropriate official channels before reporting. Press release April 16, 2013, 5:15 p.m. EDT Remarks of Special Agent in Charge Richard DesLauriers at Press Conference on Bombing Investigation Let me recap our efforts in this investigation. Yesterday at this time, our collaborative efforts were focused on saving lives and treating the injured. At the same time, resources were directed to ensure the safety of our community. As soon as those important tasks were completed, first responders focused on establishing a criminal investigation. The FBI Boston’s Joint Terrorism Task Force, composed of more than 30 federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies, including Boston Police, Massachusetts State Police, and ATF, HSI, United States Secret Service, and others responded to the scene. Many of them were already there as part of the general security for the marathon already in place. The first step law enforcement took was to secure the physical area around the blast for the purpose of preserving evidence in the area related to the devices itself. This morning the FBI, along with Boston PD, Massachusetts State Police, and ATF officially began its forensic evidence recovery effort at the site. Their goal was to recover physical items related to the blast. Those items have been recovered and sent to the FBI’s Laboratory in Quantico, Virginia. There, specialized examiners will reconstruct the device and determine its makeup and components. Among items partially recovered are pieces of black nylon—which could be from a backpack—and what appear to be fragments of BBs and nails possibly contained in a pressure cooker device. We are expediting this blast evidence to our Laboratory in Quantico, Virginia for a complete and thorough analysis. More Director Mueller Briefs President on Bombing Investigation FBI Director Mueller updates President Obama on the explosions that occurred in Boston. Seated, from left, are Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano; Tony Blinken, deputy national security advisor; Jake Sullivan, national security advisor to the Vice President; Attorney General Eric Holder; Lisa Monaco, assistant to the president for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism; and White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza). April 16, 2013, 9:30 a.m. EDT Special Agent in Charge Richard DesLauriers Speaks at Press Conference Regarding Boston Marathon Explosions I would like to start this morning by thanking the first responders from Boston EMS and Boston Fire Department and the volunteer physicians, nurses, and medical staff from the community who volunteered at the marathon. Their services and heroic actions saved lives yesterday afternoon. We continue to work shoulder-to-shoulder with our JTTF [Joint Terrorism Task Force] partners and the Boston Police Department and the Massachusetts State Police, as well as all of the other JTTF agencies. Our mission is clear—to bring to justice those responsible for the marathon bombing. The American public wants answers. The citizens of the city of Boston and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts want and deserve answers. This group of dedicated men and women standing before you today pledge to do everything possible to get those answers. More April 15, 2013, 8:45 p.m. EDT FBI Assists Boston Police Department Regarding Explosions Along Marathon Route and Elsewhere A multi-agency response including state and federal law enforcement agencies has been activated and is investigating the cause of the explosions along the Boston Marathon route and elsewhere. The FBI’s Boston Division stands with the Boston Police Department (BPD) and remains on-scene. The FBI is offering its assistance in whatever capacity BPD requires. The situation remains fluid, and it remains too early to establish the cause and motivation. More